Thank you very much, everyone. Good afternoon. Welcome, everyone. Thank you for coming and, again,
participating.
Again, we are continuing our healing retreat. It's been a little while, and we've been practicing.
Together, it's been wonderful. Again, as we said yesterday, one again, beautiful time that we are
spending.
In a way, together, together, inspiring each other, and also, somebody undermining each other's
practices,
but we follow our heart, which is really wonderful. And so, I thank all of you for your
participation
and your enthusiasm and joy of the practicing. Thank you.
And now, with this, again, we're going to follow the teaching, and then, particularly this teaching
,
we're following the highlight by the Khejpavi of the New Rumuji. So, again, with all the different
genres,
not just only this time, as you all know, we should activate our beautiful motivation,
and with the motivation of the joy and appreciation, and as well as vastness,
motivation of the bodhicata, and the purity, understanding, or the realization of the entire this
phenomena existing.
Those are all so important. In particular, also, we've been talking about the joy and appreciation,
which are also more grateful, graceful, gratitude. This is really so important, so good.
In life, we have so many beautiful situations and circumstances and opportunities. We're surrounded
by this.
But regularly, all of us who are maybe in this retreat, really, to compare with many, many in the
world,
what they're going through, challenging and difficult troubles, and to compare with them and look
to us
and read our situation, read their situation, we have so many ways to thankful, to grateful.
When we're thankful, grateful, that is dharma, called Buddhism, for that teaching. That is dharma.
It's not whether we're going on the sidetrack of the dharma. We're in the stream of dharma.
When practicing with joy and appreciation, being grateful, grateful, where we practice,
that's the way we need to move forward. That's the way to advance in the teaching and developing
our realization with joy.
And with graceful, thankful, gratitude, we combine both together.
We already understand the very inner teaching. Truly, it is absolutely beautiful, so beautiful.
It's so beautiful. It's healing to ourselves and healing to others. At the same time, it's the
great qualifications,
the qualifications, obstacles. So I'm really happy to the others too.
But therefore, this motivation, this intention to activate that, that means we're touching to our
goal of true nature,
true nature of mind. No one we can't ignore or we miss out on that, because we're looking somewhere
else,
and not looking to the way it is really coming, what we need. We're completely distracted.
That is the duality. That is the handedness. That is the way going to samsara, continually.
When we should look at our own situations, circumstances, and bring with you in the applications.
And in all ancient great masters, for example, the body, those who practice in bodhisattvas or bod
hisattvas,
every situation they feel grateful. Not just having a good time or good situation, every situation.
When they have troubles, they are grateful. When they have a good time, they are grateful.
How that's said? I mean, you all know that. You heard those things. We all know that.
You heard what the teacher said. I'm happy if I'm sick. I'm happy if I am sick, because I am
cleansing bad garments.
I'm happy if I'm not sick. I can increase my gratitude and good deeds to all the beings.
Whatever is good, I'm going to use that form to increase, develop my realization, strength, courage
, and commitment of the body together.
That's what we're listening to many times. When we are suffering in sadness, we're cleansing, pur
ifying.
We're learning. When we get sad in the suffering, take that as grateful.
According to Bodhisattva yesterday, we're talking about only practice.
We're taking that suffering. Feel that you're taking suffering, the difficult of other beings.
So, the other beings are not going to get sick in the troubles. Really, only practices.
So, every situation, circumstances transform into a path in the development of our realization.
Therefore, the courageous ones of the Bodhisattvas never defeated by any situation circumstances.
They're moving forward. They're moving deeply into their practices. They're going to increase their
realization.
That's what religion teaching says. And that's what all these great practitioners or those masters
will read,
read the life story of these great teachers, masters, how they did.
So, therefore, bring up those joys and applications. Being grateful is so important, so special.
Many times, we're bored. We're bored of being grateful.
We're bored of our life of gratitude because our ego thinking is so powerful, so miserable.
No matter whatever we do for the ego, it's never satisfied. Never satisfied.
Even the whole world is your own. Still, I'm sure the ego will not be happy, not be satisfied.
Still, something needs more. Something needs more.
For so many people, when they come completely obsessed with this ego clinging and greedy,
and we see it, it ended up the troubles.
Even in this lifetime, so many, those powerful beings, powerful men, powerful people,
the way high positions, they're obsessed, they're grasping and doing all things,
and never enough, never ending, ended up, they are completely disastrous leaders.
Why? Because greedy. Greedy and so ungrateful. Ungrateful.
Those are the teachings, example tools.
For those reasons, being grateful is so, so important.
And all with bodhicitta, it's all arising and generating with bodhicitta.
When we have a good heart with bodhicitta, that all comes.
When we have good joy and appreciation, we're exploring our good nature, as I said,
the nature of the mind. So therefore, we should not miss the opportunity.
We should not miss the whole point.
Point our best and home sweet homes. Those are our home sweet homes.
Homes, we should really activate those with that richness, richness heart,
richness heart of the grateful, joy, bodhicitta, and then practice.
Then, it's so wonderful, it's so strong, beautiful, humble, simple, smooth,
and deeper than advancing, advancing on the Burmese and Pathist.
So therefore, those are really important again for all of us,
and we should always remind each other, ask that,
and we should remind every day to ask.
Because in the morning, we will make up, should have what I'm talking,
these good motivations, joy and appreciation, being grateful for bodhicitta.
Start day with that, it's so wonderful, it's healing.
And also, when we go to bed, sleeping, and we can remember that.
Again, we activate those joy and appreciation, appreciation in both each other.
And during the daytime, have those for two, as many as you can.
Those are the hard essence of the practice of Buddha Dharma,
teaching, of the greatest teacher of the Buddha Chapter Moon.
So those are, again, with those understanding,
and then we again follow with these teachings what we're doing.
Again, of course, we follow the instructions of the great Master Munki Bhai,
the other great Masters.
I started talking about the first novel, second novel, and third novel,
and now we are going to talk a little bit about the first novel.
The first novel is the intentions.
And the intentions are the same thing, I just said that.
You're in appreciation, and the bodhicittas, and those are in devotion
with the poor renouncing your thoughts.
Those are said. Not just only in the beginning of time,
but here, for example, he's known as Dunyurinhui.
Tiafke Dunyurinhui listed it.
Those are the trade or the wealth of the practitioners,
the permanent wealth of practitioners.
Wealth, that means that if we have this, those with intelligent thought,
quality in our heart and mind, we are very wealthy practitioners,
spiritually we are really wealthy practitioners.
When you're spiritually we know a wealthy practitioner,
that individual is very rich.
That individual is really rich.
Material wealth can be very rich, but still mentally unborn,
mentally really poor, and very miserous and strange.
But spiritually wealth, that is the richest person.
And that is the story often in the Kinti particularly when you say it,
many times, to all of us, many times.
We're in the 11th century, the great master,
but Satya Pendeta was a great master of Tibet,
of the Satya schools of Tibetan Buddhism,
and Satya Pendeta was the one of the most famous masters,
scholars in the Tibetan Buddhism, and I think all in the world.
Definitely he's very tall and scholarly.
And he's tall, and they realize at your level,
he is the emanation of the magicians.
But, so, when Jangis Khan began to explore interest on the spiritual,
he heard the reputation of the Tibetan Buddhism
and the particular reputation of the great Satya Pendeta.
He invited, invited to it.
There is long stories, of course.
Historians, but finally, when Satya Pendeta went to Jangis Khan's court,
or the palace, in his palace,
and even though Satya Pendeta is quite old, already the old age,
but because of his concerning thinking of all the other subjects and other beings,
if Satya Pendeta thought, if I go to see the Kublakan for this week,
that will bring more benefit into the subject and all the beings, then,
so therefore, with this intention, he went to the Kublakan's court,
and instead, so Kublakan and, sorry, not Kublakan, Jangis Khan,
and according to that what I heard.
And then we decided, when they had discussions,
all that, in the Tibetan, one who is a great master, who is a great scholar,
who is a great, who is the richest man,
and who is the most efficient man in the Tibetan,
all those kinds of, this great Khan asking to Satya Pendeta.
So Satya Pendeta answered one after another.
So, personally said, Jangis Khan asked,
who is the richest man in Tibet?
He said, Karag Bongchon.
Karag Bongchon is the richest man in Tibet,
who is the most efficient man in Tibet.
Malareva is the most efficient man in Tibet.
And who is the most, kind of like, educated man in Tibet?
And he said, that consider me.
He said, kind of referring to himself that.
And so he asked a minute from those questions.
So then this great Khan, according to the historical what I heard,
or that, that he sent messages to check out those things.
So, reality and when he came to check out those things,
a message went into Tibet and he checked those
and went back to Satya, to King's Court, and then he reported that.
So, he went to Karag Bongchon, the richest man of Tibet.
He went to see the Karag Bongchon, the great master.
So, when he met this richest man, the most richest man of Tibet,
when he went to see him, said, Karag Bongchon is sitting in a cave.
Cave, one mattress that used to be his cushion, this is his blanket.
One mattress, that is.
And one is a cub, one kind of cub.
He has yag hu, hu, I think, h-o-o-f, hu, hu, yag hu.
The yag hu, that is his cub, his bones, bones.
So, this is the richest man, what the great master, Satya Pirda, referred, richest man of Tibet.
So, it's completely kind of where what we think is quite a difference.
The most efficient man, that means he was most successful,
very successful man in the world, in Tibet.
He saw the Malarepa, the man who said, Malarepa.
Malarepa, who was? He used to call, in his songs, many castles.
And those are the caves. There's no really castles.
Those are Malarepa named different castles.
And so, he was really, I think, again, in an old level, he's an old man.
And with that, I mean, nothing really, kind of very thin cloth.
Public cloth is very, very thin.
So, this is what, in the state, the cave, in the mountains.
And this is the most efficient man in Tibet.
Then, the greatest scholar, that is confirmed as Satya Pirda, is the renowned one, so that's true.
So, we went back and reported that, and then, again, in their discussions.
So, why you said the richest man in Tibet, that Kharagong is maybe one of the poorest men in Tibet.
Why you said that?
Satya Pirda is not measured by the wealth of material wealth, but outside.
But it's measured with heart, with contentment.
How much contentment?
Kharagong is perfectly fine with all those, that what he has.
He's so happy, so happy and so rich, he got everything what he needed.
For today, to reach enlightenment, to benefit for all the beings, his two practices.
So, therefore, he is the most richest man in Tibet.
Therefore, the contentment is really known as the richest.
And that's why, great master Nagarjuna said, on his teachings, let his friend sit.
Among all the wealth, the contentment is the most richest ones.
For that reason, all great king of my friend increased the contentment, increased the contentment.
That's what really the great Nagarjuna, the master Nagarjuna said to his friend, the two samples,
that he said.
So, this is really true.
The great form is so important, so rich, and it's just a nice, so rich.
Even you don't have enough things, but that enough, what you have enough,
it becomes the equivalent of the telenons or billionaires, truly billionaires.
That's it.
When you don't have the contentment, even you have the telenons or the billion dollars,
billionaires, still you're born, still trying to grow up, hungry, thirsty, trying to get, trying to
grow up.
Day and night, and then day with death, die with that mental attitude, the power of status.
So, die with the poor, stay whole life with the poor, with the billionaires.
Can you believe that? How that happened? Can it truly happen?
And so therefore, this joy and appreciation is so important.
We do this forward, and then we're talking about the body catheters.
Body together is essential to rich enlightenment, as we've been discussing,
or to benefit from all living beings, and to also make friends to all the beings.
And we would like to have more friends, friends, increasing body together.
And we'd like to remove the suffering difficult, increasing body together.
Body together is everything.
Therefore, body together is rich, fulfilling jewels.
It's fulfilling all the riches, all the riches, good things we will fulfill in the samsara,
good things we will fulfill in the nirvana.
And therefore, body together is rich, fulfilling jewel of samsara and nirvana.
It's so special, beautiful.
And that's what I really in the teaching said.
And also, all the great practices, master's practices.
So this body together is divided according to the teaching, to body together.
First is wishing body together, and second is actualizing body together,
and wishing body together.
But when we have wishing body together, how we develop?
And with this best premise is compassion.
Compassion with this combined together and taking up all living beings,
we raise up the body with that thought of body together.
And then body together is activated and practiced by the full boundless.
When full boundless are well, kind of quite good and stable,
and then do the tungmi practices.
Tungmi practices is one word or one kind of one of the practices among those three.
As I said, tungmi, yesterday, as I said, or the other day,
first is equalizing, dagingyama practices.
Second is tungmi practices.
Third is dawijinji.
Others are more important than myself.
Those three are the exercising of the full boundless practices,
or wishing body together mentally.
Full boundless practices, also mentally practices.
But that also dawijinji you cannot do physically.
You do as much as you can do according with the capabilities.
But many is a practice of the mind, mentally, expanding.
That means most of the time in samsara, our mind is very limited,
it closes many boundaries, but this time we break the boundaries
and spreading the loving kindness beyond the borders
and separating the compassion beyond the borders
and spreading the joy and the rejoice
without borders and equanimity, without borders.
That is known as whole boundless.
That is actually in the teaching, that is nature of the mind.
Nature of the mind has no border.
We met border.
That means dualistic, duality mind met border.
It is to connect with ego clinging or grasping and clinging.
Ego clinging and grasping are obscurations.
They are the handedness, bringing peace and happiness,
or ultimate peace and happiness.
Therefore, break the borders is important.
So now, those are what we've been discussing.
We have been discussing this whole boundless of the wishing body jetties.
Now, I'm going to summarize that wishing body jetties.
Now, wishing body jetta we should always preserve.
We have to keep this foundation of the actualizing body jetta.
Wishing body jetta is a foundation.
As foundation, in the center column, we're going to maintain that.
And to maintain that, what great master, Lung Kimba said,
in the teaching, not just only Lung Kimba,
great master Nagarjuna, Master Vaidu, or the Buddha Shatamani said,
these four positive things should always kill
and four negatives are avoided to maintain, keep up the body jetties.
And first is honoring to the noble ones.
First is honoring the noble ones.
Then I'll go into the details, each of those parts.
First, I'll list it and then we'll go over that.
The fourth is honoring the noble ones,
or honoring the two winner rebels, honoring to the winner rebels.
And the second is, is entrusting of the good things
and reducing acknowledging of the good activities.
And third is praising the noble deeds.
And honesty to all the beings.
Those are known as four positives.
Fourth is honoring to all the winner rebels.
That means to honor to the elders, your elders,
not only the elders, all the spiritually elders,
we should honor them, particularly Bodhisattvas,
one who is learning the Bodhisattva.
We are learning the Mahayana teachings.
So, ever who is older, we should always honor them
and always respect them.
When we do that, whatever it does, it will maintain our Bodhisattva.
It will help us maintain our principle of Bodhisattva.
Should honor winner rebels, winner rebels.
And that also includes the elders persons,
those elders persons, such as our parents,
our teachers, our spiritual teachers,
our regular teachers.
Teachers who are, who showed us, whatever it is,
he showed us knowledge and skills, matters,
respect and particularly, of course, Bodhisattvas
who showed us teaching clearly.
So respect and honor.
These were externally your honoring those.
When we understand our Bodhisattva, our body.
Then the next one is acknowledging of the good deeds of others.
I think that's maybe translated, acknowledge.
That means anyone who is doing good things,
good deed, particular deed of the beneficial thought
or good heart, loving kindness, compassion or good heart,
community level, public level and larger level,
or even a small level, if we're doing something good,
we should acknowledge.
Very good, appreciate.
That means rejoice, joy and appreciation.
Your kind of honoring, acknowledging, remembering of the good deeds of others,
what it does, it will help us to maintain our principles.
So we know which is good, which is bad.
We at least acknowledge.
It's so important to sustain, to maintain our wishing Bodhisattvas
or Bodhisattva, assemble to the Bodhisattva to maintain.
And then, present to the noble ones.
Present with the noble ones.
That means particularly Bodhisattvas.
Any Bodhisattva who is doing work and helping,
supporting, benefiting to the other beings,
whatever deed is leveled from the really good heart that we see,
we should always praise them.
Wonderful, beautiful.
And same thing, may I happen to do the same thing,
what they do me.
May I can follow to help, benefit of others,
as this individually novels the joy.
Now what do I do? Acknowledging, sentient, praising.
Mentally praising, verbally praising,
physically praising such as pointed hand in Buddhism.
Pointed hand is honoring, honoring and praising or greeting.
Greeting.
Or whatever the tradition is, sporty languages.
To that honor, that is known as praising.
So externally you are praising that,
but inwardly we strengthen the principle,
value of the Bodhisattva.
It's going to help.
And then, fourth one,
is to be honest to all the beings.
Honest.
Simple, honest.
It's truthful.
Nice and kind.
So that means, what we do,
that met with heart.
From the heart, it's coming.
Not pertaining, not counter-relating,
counter-covering of that.
But to honest.
Physically honest, verbally honest, mentally honest.
With love, with compassion, with wisdom.
We do that, but in the teachings,
it will help to maintain the Bodhisattvas.
Those are known as poor positives.
And poor negatives are exactly opposite of that.
So if we do poor negatives, opposite of that,
that will hurt, damage our Bodhisattvas.
First is, instead of acknowledging,
honoring that,
and is receiving the Bodhisattvas, receiving.
So, deceiving only rebels.
That means, you are doing something,
can't be like saying,
but trained as truth, but reality is pretending.
So deceiving.
That will damage the Bodhisattva.
And therefore, your heart should be there.
So honor, honor.
Centennial or carnival deceiving is cunning.
It is negativities.
For that reason, it will damage both each other.
Then it will damage the Bodhisattva.
It will file up the obscurations, negativities.
So therefore, carnival like honor.
And the second one is, second negative is,
then not acknowledging, but instead,
you're kind of almost trying to make guilty of the others,
good performance, good deeds.
Even there's no reason.
But also due to that, again, some emotion,
even if they're doing good,
and the activity is so beautiful, special,
but kind of trying to make every way,
like guilty of the individual one who did good things.
That is, again, negativities.
What it does, it will damage our both each other.
It will create the obscurations.
And then also, of course,
we're not instead inspiring and helping the others,
then we're also kind of completely there.
They're interested, enthusiasm, damaging the others.
So that is second negativity, that damage,
undermine the both each others.
And then, next one is,
next one is instead honoring those Bodhisattvas deeds,
and we are criticizing,
criticizing the Bodhisattva activity of the generosity,
criticizing the Bodhisattva activities of the moralities,
or patience, or whatever way,
trying to kind of criticize the making common,
and all that thing.
That is negativities.
It is, of course, well-damaged benefit of activities,
but deep down it is,
undermining, uprooting our both each other.
Our both each other.
The precious jewel of the both each other is scarred.
Scarred, scarred, scarred, or it is stained.
Stained, restraining them.
Then, fourth negativity is always,
always growing or using the last word,
the cunning and hypocrisis,
hypocrites activities to the other leaders.
Hypocrisis or cunningness.
Or I think also there is a word called swirling.
Swirling, swindle.
Swindling.
Swindling or cunning, or deceitful.
Deceiving.
So that means pretending nice, beautiful,
cover-up. Reality is bullshit.
Oh, I'm not going to say other words.
It's not good.
It's bullshit.
It's the cover-up.
So the cover-up, the bullshit,
is sonalete is not going to feel good.
So this is the...
Even though it's a short time, folks,
but then it's not that time we propose.
It is undermining, damaging our body together.
Body together.
We prefer a jewel of the body together.
The precious jewel that we are holding is really damaging.
That means we are receiving all the beings
and all the enlightened beings.
When we took a rough body together of ours,
we invited all the beings for six rounds.
We invited all the gods.
We invited all the invisible beings.
We invited all the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, Bodhisattva.
In front of that, we declared that today
I'm going to check the Bodhisattva
to benefit all living beings.
I'm going to follow with all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.
Exactly what you did.
I'm going to follow with that same way.
We declared that, not loudly.
Then also in teaching,
it said when we checked the Bodhisattvas
and all the gods and Buddhas enlightened,
everybody rejoiced.
They rejoiced.
We declared that we told all the beings,
"Today I invite you to be my best friend."
From now on, I'm not your enemy.
I'm not your opponent,
but I am nothing but your services.
That we declared.
And now we're doing this cutting in the seed force.
So we are deceiving,
not just one single part, two single beings,
but all the beings.
They call the teaching.
And not just one Buddha, two Buddhas,
or one Bodhisattva, two Bodhisattvas.
We're deceiving all the trying to deceive,
even though we cannot deceive the Buddha, the Bodhisattva.
But we're just trying to deceive.
Cover up our eye and perform some blindfold activities.
Then what it does?
It damages our body together.
So therefore, it is so important,
so precious to preserve this jewel.
Jewel.
This jewel is not just a jewel, as I said,
short-term period.
This jewel of the body together,
love, kindness, compassion.
It's jewel of all the time.
And all the beings,
all the beings, every living beings,
this is so special, so beautiful, so powerful.
Therefore, in what the teaching said,
great Master Ghambob said,
what in his teachings,
teaching said that,
"Remembering always order to preserve the Bodhisattva.
Remembering always the benefit of the Bodhisattva.
Power of the Bodhisattva.
Benefiting to my Son,
I have benefited all the certain beings.
Remembering and never give up the other beings.
Never, never, never give up.
Never going to give up any living beings.
My eye of Bodhisattva,
or my compassion of Bodhisattva,
rather than I'm not going to give any living beings.
Living beings.
And praying always to Buddha's Bodhisattva.
May I ever to maintain the Bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva.
And accumulating merits as much as we can.
And delegating that merit to maintain the Bodhisattva,
to benefit all living beings.
Those are in the teachings of the great Master Ghambob,
highlighted, but it is of course Buddha teaching,
but highlighted that will have to keep up the Bodhisattva,
strong and fresh, very authentically,
not kind of decline the Bodhisattva.
I'm expiring the Bodhisattva.
It will remain precious.
Precious.
As it's started, it will remain fresh.
Not just fresh, it's expanding.
It's growing.
It's blooming.
So that is really the Bodhisattva.
And now, once we develop this Bodhisattva beautifully,
then we can enter the actualizing Bodhisattva.
So that means, the actualizing Bodhisattva is best upon the reaching Bodhisattva.
We reach it.
And the actualizing Bodhisattva is then principal part of the practices.
What I do, when we follow the teachings of Lomchima,
beginning noble, middle noble, so this is the actualizing Bodhisattva is middle noble.
Middle noble practices without grasping,
without clinging, and we can.
That is wishing or actualizing Bodhisattva.
Actualizing Bodhisattva can be divided into two.
Those are known as Relatrute Bodhisattva and Absolute Truth Bodhisattva.
So this is.
And these two truths are Relatrute Bodhisattva
and Absolute Truth Bodhisattva is summarized within six parameters.
And this teaching of the Chyabji Dmyurumu cannot come on its own.
And all this, to the end, is teaching on the principal part of the practices.
Personal, it is within the six paramata practices.
All in six paramata practices.
It is the principal part of the practices.
It is six paramata.
I listed, of course, you all know.
We all know there are six paramatas.
For the generosity paramata, morality paramata, patient paramata,
and then joyful effort paramata, and concentration paramata,
and as well as wisdom paramatas.
Those are the six paramatas.
And of course, I will go over those little details at each point
as we continue our healing retreat.
I will go over, and that is my brief talk today about the Bodhisattva.
So we concluded now, kind of like highlight the principal part aspect
of the reaching Bodhisattva and highlight.
And that is the foundation of all the Buddha's enlightenment.
And from there, we begin to take that advancing that in path and bhoomis.
We did six paramata practice.
They called it the context of the six paramatas.
And then that is the daily practices.
And so that is my talk.
And again, thank you very much, everyone, for participating.
And thank you, Pachidili. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone.
Again, I want to do a short meditative, and then do the healing practices.